# Lecture 1.4 - Conditional Expressions and Values

Some acronymn definitions:
- b/w = between
- rhs = right-hand side

### Conditional Expressions

To express choosing b/w two alternatives, Scala has a conditional expression ```if-else```. It looks like an ```if-else``` in Java, but is used for expressions, not statements.

Example:
```scala
def abs(x: Int) = if (x >= 0) x else - x
```
x >= 0 is a *predicate*, of type *Boolean*.

### Boolean Expressions

Boolean expressions ```b``` can be composed of:
```scala
true false // Constants
!b // Negation
b && b // Conjunction
b || b // Disjunction
// and of course comparison operations
e <= e, e >= e, e < e, e > e, e == e, e != e
``` 
### Rewrite rules for Booleans
Reduction rules for boolean expressions in Scala follow "short-curcuit evaluation".

### Exercise: Formulate rewrite rules for if-else

### Value Definitions
We have seen that function parameters can be passed by value or be passed by name. The same distinction applies to definitions. The ```def``` form is "by-name"; its rhs is evaluated on each use. There is also a ```val``` form, which is "by-value". Example:
```scala
val x = 2
val y = square(x)
```
The RHS of a val definition is evaluated at the point of the definition itself. Afterwards, the name refers to the val. For instance, y above refers to 4, not square(2).

### Value Definitions and Termination
The difference b/w val and def as a definition form becomes apparent when the rhs does not terminate. Given:
```scala
def loop: Boolean = loop
```
A definition
```scala
 def x = loop
```
Is OK, but a definition:
```scala
val x = loop
```
will led to an infinite loop.

### Exercise
Write functions and or such that for all argument expressions x and y:
and(x, y) == x && y
or(x,y) == x || y

```scala
// This variant won't work for non-terminating arguments!!!
def and(x:Boolean, y:Boolean) = if (x) y else false
and(false, loop) // y gets returned, since y=loop, and loop is undefined, we have an infinite loop.
// This variant will work.
def and(x:Boolean, y: =>Boolean) = if(x) y else false 
def or(x:Boolean, y=>Boolean) = if (x) True else y
// As of Scala 2.10.6, it seems like both of the variants above will fail when an undefined variable is passed in.
```
