# Lecture 1.7 - Tail Recursion

### Rewriting example:
Consider ```gcd```, the function that computes the greatest common denominator of two numbers. Here's an implementation of ```gcd``` using Euclid's algorithm:
```scala
def gcd(a: Int, b: Int): Int =
	if (b == 0) a else gcd(b, a % b)
```
```gcd(14, 21)``` is evaluated as follows:
```scala
gcd(14, 21)
-> if (21 == 0) 14 else gcd(21, 14 % 21)
-> if (false) 14 else gcd(21, 14 % 21)
-> gcd(21, 14 % 21)
-> gcd(21, 14)
-> if (14 == 0) 21 else gcd(14, 21 % 14)
-> gcd(14, 7)
-> gcd(7, 0)
```

### Another rewriting example:
Consider factorial:
```scala
def factorial(n: Int): Int = 
	if (n == 0) 1 else n * factorial(n - 1)
	
factorial(4)
-> if (4 == 0) else 4 * factorial(4 - 1)
-> 4 * factorial(3)
-> 4 * (3 * factorial(2))
...
```

### What is the difference between GCD and Factorial?
- GCD's reduction sequence essentially oscillates. It always calls the same function without a buildup of intermediate values.
- On the other hand, there's a buildup of intermediate values in  ```factorial()```  which are reduced at the end.

### Tail Recursion
*Implementation Consideration:* If a function calls itself as its last action, then the function's stack frame can be reused. This is called *tail recursion*. 
- In general, if the last action of a function consists of calling a function (which may be the same), one stack frame would be sufficient for both functions. Such calls are called *tail-calls*.
- We could treat tail recursion as the functional equivalent of a loop, and it executes just as efficiently as a loop. 

### Tail Recursion in Scala
In Scala, only directly recursive calls to the current function are optimized. 

One can require that a function is tail-recursive using a ```@tailrec``` annotation:
```scala
@tailrec
def gcd(a: Int, b: Int): Int = ...
```
If the annotation is given, and the implementation of gcd were not tail recursive, an error would be issued.

#####When should we make a function tail recursive?
- Allows us to avoid very deep recursive chains that blow the stack -- allows us to avoid a stack overflow exception. 
- However, if your input data is not susceptible to deep recursive chains, then clarity trumps efficiency every time, so write your function the clearest way you can (which often is not tail recursive), and don't worry about stack frames that are spent.
- After all, *"Premature optimization is the root of all evil"* - Donald Knuth 

##### Example: Make a tail-recursive factorial function.

```scala
object tail_recursion_exercise {
  def factorial(n: Int): Int = {
    def loop(n: Int, accumulator: Int): Int =
      if (n == 0) accumulator else loop(n - 1, n * accumulator)
    loop(n, 1)
  }
    factorial(10)
}
```


