# 1.5 - Square roots with Newton's method.
To compute sqrt(x):
- Start with an initial *estimate* y (let's pick y=1)
- Repeatedly improve the estimate by taking the mean of y and x/y.
Example: x = 2

### Implementation in Scala (1)
First, defin a func which computes one iteration step
```scala
def sqrtIter(guess: Double, x: Double): Double =
	if (isGoodEnough(guess, x)) guess
	else sqrtIter(improve(guess, x), x)
```
Note that sqrtIter is *recursive*, its rhs calls itself. *Recursive* functions need an *explicit return type* in Scala. For **non-recursive** functions, the return type is *optional*

# 1.6 - Blocks and Lexical Scope
- Good functional programming style to split up a task into many small functions
- Names of functions like sqrtIter, improve, and isGoodEnough matter only for the *implementation* of sqrt, not for its *usage*
- Normally we'd not like users to access these functions directly
- We can achieve this and avoid "name-space-pollution" by putting functions inside **sqrt**

### Blocks in Scala
- Delimited by braces { ... }
```scala
{ val x = f(3)
  x * x
}
``` 
- Contains a sequence of defns or exprs
- Last element of a block defines is an expression that defines its return value
- This return expr can be preceded by auxiliary defns
- Blocks are themselves expressions in Scala; a block may appear anywhere an expression can.
### Blocks and Visibility
- The defns inside a block are only visible from *within* the block.
- The definitions inside a block *shadow* definitions of the same names outside the block.

### Lexical Scoping
- Defns of outer scopes are visible inside a block, unless they are shadowed. 
- We can simplify ```sqrt``` by eliminating redundant occurences of the ```x``` parameter, which means the same thing everywhere:
- Nesting helper functions makes it easy to reuse outer definitions without passing them explicitly as parameters.

### Semicolons and infix operators
One issue w/ Scala's semicolon convention is how to write expressions that span several lines. For example:
```scala
someLongExpression
+ someOtherExpression
```
would be interpreted as *two* expressions:
```scala
someLongExpression;
+ someOtherExpression
```
There are two ways to overcome this problem:

- You could write the multi-line expr. in parentheses, b/c semicolons are never inserted inside the ```(...):```
```scala
(someLongExpression
 + someOtherExpression)
```
- Or you could write an operator on the first line, b/c this tells the Scala compiler that the expr. is not yet finished:
```scala
someLongExpression +
someOtherExpression
```

### Summary
We've covered simple elements of Functional Progrmaming (FP) in Scala:
- arithmetic and boolean exprs
- conditional exprs and if-else
- functions w/ recursion
- nesting and lexical scope
1. We've learned the difference b/w call-by-name and call-by-value evaluation strategies.
2. We've learned a way to reason about program execution: reduce exprs using the substitution model.
3. This model will be used in future lectures.