# 2.1 - Higher Order Functions

### Higher-Order Functions
- Functional langs treat functions as *first-class values*.
- This means that, like any other value, a function can be passed as a parameter and return as a result.
	- This provides a flexible way to compose programs. 
	- Functions that take other functions as params or that return functions as results are called *higher order functions*

### Example:
Take the sum of the ints between a and b:
```scala
def sumInts(a: Int, b: Int): Int = 
	if (a > b) 0 else a + sumInts(a + 1, b)
```
Take the sum of the cubes of all the ints between a and b:
```scala
def cube(x :Int): Int = x * x * x
def sumCubes(a: Int, b: Int): Int = 
	if (a > b) 0 else cube(a) + sumCubes(a + 1, b)
```
Take the sum of the factorials of all the ints b/w a and b:
```scala
def sumFactorials(a: Int, b: Int): Int = 
	if (a > b) 0 else fact(a) + sumFactorials(a + 1, b)
```
There are special cases where we need to sum functions between all values of a and b for different functions. Could we factor out the common pattern into a single method?

### Summing with Higher-Order Functions:
Let's define:
```scala
def sum(f: Int=> Int, a: Int, b: Int): Int = 
	if (a > b) 0
	else f(a) + sum(f, a + 1, b)
```
We can then generalize:
```scala
def sumInts(a: Int, b: Int) = sum(id, a, b)
def sumCubes(a: Int, b: Int) = sum(cube, a, b)
def sumFactorials(a: Int, b: Int) = sum(fact, a, b)
```
where
```scala
def id(x: Int): Int = x
def cube(x: Int): Int = x * x * x
```

### Function Types
- One thing that's new here is a function type.
- The type A => B is the type of a *function* that takes an arg of type A and returns a result of type B.
- So, Int => Int is the type of functions that map integers to integers.

### Anonymous Functions
- Looking at our previous example, we successfully shortened the functions for summing Ints, Cubes, and Factorials. However, this led to the creation of a bunch of functions we didn't need to reuse.
- Passing functions as params leads to the creation of many small functions.
	- Sometimes its tedious to have to define (and name) these functions using *def*.
- Instead, we can write function literals, which are called *anonymous functions*.

### Anonymous Function Syntax:
Example: A function that takes the cube of its input:
```scala
(x: Int) => x * x * x
```
Here, (x: Int) is the *parameter* of the function, and x * x * x is its *body*.
- The type of the parameter can be omitted if it can be inferred by the compiler from the context.
- If there are several parameters, they are separated by commas:
```scala
(x: Int, y: Int) => x + y
```

### Anonymous Functions are Syntactic Sugar.
An anonymous function *(x1 : T1, ..., xn : Tn) => E* can always be expressed using a def as follows:
```scala
def f(x1 : T1, ... xn : Tn) = E; f
```
where *f* is an arbitrary, fresh name (that's not yet used in the program). Thus, anonymous functions are *syntactic sugar*.

### Summation with Anonymous Functions
Using anon funcs, we can write sums in a shorter way:
```scala
def sumInts(a: Int, b: Int) = sum(x => x, a , b)
def sumCubes(a: Int, b: Int) = sum(x => x * x * x, a, b)
```
### Exercise
The sum function uses linear recursion. Write a tail-recursive version by replacing the ???s.
```scala
def sum(f: Int => Int)(a: Int, b:Int): Int = {
	def loop(a: Int, acc: Int): Int = {
		if (???) ???
		else loop(???, ???)
	}
	loop(???, ???)
}
```

Tail-recursive solution:
```scala
def sum(f: Int => Int)(a: Int, b: Int): Int = {
	def loop(a: Int, acc: Int): Int = {
		if (a > b) acc
		else loop(a + 1, f(a) + acc)
	}
	loop(a, 0)
}
```
